Pebble Virtual Machine documentation

Developed by vantheman
Product of The Nuovi Orizzonti Company


Pebble is a dead-simple virtual machine designed for environments where a full
runtime would be too large but proper scripting and automation is still important.
Pebble attempts to balance speed and size, while keeping safety and isolation
the number one priority. Pebble is designed to be fully host-safe. A Pebble script 
should directly never crash, never 
corrupt memory, and never damage the host in any way. This is designed as part of 
the core architecture and philosophy of the Pebble virtual machine: never allow code 
running against the virtual machine to corrupt the host.

Pebble uses a CISC-like variable-oriented bytecode language also named Pebble (the
Pebble language), which is interpreted inside of Pebble, which is the virtual
machine (both the bytecode language and virtual machine are named Pebble). There
is a simple textual bytecode representation designed to compile down 1:1 (or close
to). This is designed as a compiler target and a stable ABI (this has remained
stable and compatible in syntax since Alpha version 2). Since the bytecode language
is already fairly high-level, compilers targeting the Pebble language are generally
pretty simple (eg, no advanced expression handling, no variable handling internally,
no complex optimization passes, and so on). All of the optimization is designed to
be handled internally inside of the Pebble virtual machine itself.

Pebble is explicity not a stack machine. Pebble bytecode acts on variables directly
in the same way a register machine would. Pebble has the ability to express full
conceptual operations as single instructions, following the CISC philosiphy, while
taking it one step further, allowing expression of entire language concepts.
Eg. a compiler may be able to express 'x = a + b / 14 * 3' as a single 
instruction. The virtual machine handles loading, storing, variable resolution,
and so on, all internally, completly transparent to the user and / or compiler.

The Pebble virtual machine is intended to not expose types to the user in any way.
The user should have no idea what type their variable is being stored as, size
constraints of said type and / or variable, and so on. All of this is handled by the
Pebble VM. Types are simply an implementation detail of the virtual machine itself.

The Pebble VM allows for native single-instruction operations involving things like
loading a variable, performing a complex mathematical expression involving multiple
operations, variable look-ups, floating-point operations, and so on, and a store.
This is part of the Pebble VM's attempt to be CISC-like both internally and as
to the user. This allows for major optimizations inside of the Pebble VM itself and
for the bytecode language to be viable as a standalone high-level programming
language in itself.

The Pebble virtual machine is designed to be lightweight and efficient. The Pebble
virtual machine should only need a few megabytes of memory to run the majority of
programs and benchmarks, as well as only needing a 32bit or 64bit x86 or arm CPU.
The Pebble virtual machine is single-thredded and entirly 32bit internally, allowing
it to run on even the oldest of hardware, while still allowing high-performance
operations on larger data types through library calls.

Pebble isolates all libraries through the Escape function. The Escape function will
scan through the list of library functions compiled into the virtual machine binary
and run said library function. Libraries generally are written in native Zig and
only have access to the virtual machines variable tables.

The textual bytecode language known as Pebble exposes a few keywords as primitives.
These keywords are designed to provide the basic functionality any virtual machine
or programming language should require. These keywords include

	- New -
		Perform stated operation and store result to a variable.

	- Func -
		Begin recording instructions to the function tables.

	- Call -
		Begin executing a recorded block from the function tables. Return
		to the caller (pc.old + 1) after the end of the operation.

	- If -
		Jump to an instruction in the function tables if the expression
		results in a return of 0. Return to the caller (pc.old + 1) after
		the operation.

	- End -
		Stop recording instructions to the function tables.

	- Return -
		Return early to the caller (pc.old + 1) from a recorded function.

	- Escape -
		Perform a library call.

The language uses a simple expression syntax using the following

	" " - Expression 
		Resolve the expression inside of the markings and return the 
		result. Resolve variables to their value, then parse the
		remaining data as an expression.

	' ' - Literal
		Return the data as a literal. Do not parse in any way.

	{ } - Indirect expression
		Attempt to chase a pointer / reference and resolve the expression
		held there. Return the result.

	    - Copy
		Copy the data in said variable. Do not resolve as an expression.

Supported operations for expressions include

	+ 
		Add the values together and return the result.

	- 
		Subtract the right value from the left value and return the result.

	/ 
		Divide the right value from the left value and return the result.

	*
		Multiply the two values and return the result.

	< 
		Compare the right to the left. Return 0 if the right is greater than
		the left.

	>
		Compare the right to the left. Return 0 if the right is less than the
		left.

	==
		Compare the right to the left. Return 0 if the right is equal to the
		left.

	!=
		Compare the right to the left. Return 0 if the right is not equal to
		the left.

	?=
		Compare the right to the left as strings. Return 0 if the right is
		equal to the left.

	s++
		Merge the right and left strings into one string.

	-?=
		Search for the right substring in the left string. Return 0 if the
		substring is found.

	e?=
		Search for the right substring in the ending of the left string.
		Return 0 if the substring is found.

	s?=
		Search for the right substring in the start of the left substring.
		Return 0 if the substring is found.

The New instruction takes two arguments inline, one to represent the variable to
save the result of the second as. The second should be an expression.
The If instruction takes two arguments inline, one to represent the name of the
function to jump to if the condition as an expression in the second has a result
of zero. In this language, zero represents true.
The Call instruction takes one argument inline, as to represent the name of the
function to begin executing.
The End instruction takes no arguments and simply marks the interpreter to stop
recording instructions and end a function. 
Return takes no arguments and simply marks the interpreter to return to the caller
of the function.
Escape takes one argument inline as to represent the name of the library function
to call.

The libraries of the virtual machine are compiled into the virtual machine. This 
means they are built into the virtual machine binary, not held to externally or
linked against dynamically. Once the virtual machine is compiled, libraries cannot
be added or removed.





Navigating the source tree
	The sourc code tree of Pebble is designed to be simple and readable. From
	the root of your tree, you should be able to see a few directories. These
	should include

		src/ - VM source code
		libs/ - library source code
		platform/ - platform-dependent VM code
		tools/ - tools and tests for the VM
		compiler/ - the experimental compiler frontend 

	In src, there should be a few files, including
		vm.zig - main VM code
		state.zig - VM state
		limits.zig - instruction limit definitions
		docs.zig - docs import code
		allocator.zig - shared allocators
		tests.zig - tests import program
		escapes.zig - code for defining the escapes table
		version.zig - code defining version metadata

		There should also be a directory named embedded/, which should
		hold unrelated items which are embedded into the VM binary, which
		are also not source code (eg. documentation, source code programs, 
		so on).

	In libs, the default should contain just the standard library. The libraries
	are broken down by the operating system they are expected to support. This
	is generally just dirs libs/posix/ and libs/win32/.

	There should be one folder per object, each with its own libs.zig file 
	importing all libraries included into that folder. Final objetcs which
	contain the library code should be identified by having a function inside
	named run which is defined to the public. 

	To remove a library, simply go to the object's folder and comment out the 
	line importing it in libs.zig. Eg. if i wanted to remove filesystem
	libraries out of the standard library for a posix target, I would edit
	
		libs/posix/std/libs.zig
	
	and comment out

		const fs = @import("fs/libs.zig");

	This was done to make the ability to add and remove libraries from the final
	build easy. This allows the maintainer of the system to easily remove
	libraries they do not wish to allow the users to use.


Calling conventions
	Function
		Functions follow the convention of accepting arguments in the
		variables 

			__Func_<funcname>_ARG<n>

		Functions follow the convention of returning values in the 
		variables

			__Func_<funcname>_RET<n>

		Functions follow the convention of using internal variables

			__Func_<funcname>_<varname>

		Functions should only be allowed to use variables if they
		being in __Func_(funcname)_ - this is done to not clobber 
		global state.

	Escapes
		Escapes follow the convention of accepting arguments in the
		variables

			__Escape_<escapename>_ARG<n>

		Escapes follow the convention of returning values in the
		variables

			__Escape_<escapename>_RET<n>

		Escapes should only be allowed to use variables if they
		begin in __Escape_(escapename)_ - this is done to not clobber
		global state.

		Escapes should only use internal variables with the naming of

			__Escape_<escapename>_<varname>



The Standard Library
	The Pebble standard library includes functions consitored to be basic
	to system function. For most use cases, the majority of these libraries
	will not be needed and including them may become a security vulnerability.
	To combat this, the developers of Pebble has made it incredibly easy
	to remove libraries in groups or by single libraries. This is explained
	in the Escapes sections.

	- std - The Pebble Standard Library
	  - io - Basic input and output libraries
	    - print - Basic character output
	    - printLn - Basic raw character output
	    - input - Basic blocking input
	  - misc - miscelanious
	    - random - Simple seeded non-cryptographic random u16 generation
	    - time - Get the time (%a %b %e %H:%M:%S %Z %Y)
	    - sleep - Blocking wait
	  - fs - Filesystem operations
	    - dir - Directory operations
	      - change - Change current working directory
	      - get - Get current working directory
	      - list - List directories
	    - file - File operations
	      - read - Read file (raw)
	      - write - Write file
	      - writeBinary - Write file (raw)
	  - proc - Process libraries
	    - spawn - Spawn a process
	    - wait - Blocking wait for a process to complete or stop
	    - exit - Exit the current process
	  - str - Advanced string manipulation library
	    - find - Search for a string
	    - len - Get the length of a string
	    - splt - String splitting
	      - num - Offset-based string splitting
	        - left - Grab left half from offset
		- right - Grab right half from offset
	  - term - Terminal manipulation libraries
	    - color - Terminal color library
	      - basic - Basic terminal colors
	        - back - Set background color
		- fore - Set foreground color
		- reset - Reset color to default
	    - cursor - Cursor manipulation library
	      - get - Get cursor position
	      - moveAbsolute - Move cursor to an absolute position
	      - moveRelative - Move cursor relative to the current position
	    - screen - Screen manipulation
	      - clear - Clear the screen
	      - clearLine - Clear screen to line
	      - clearToEnd - Clear to end
	      - clearToEndOfLine - Clear to the end of the line

	There are currently some platform-dependent libraries outside of the
	standard. These include

		- audio - Basic audio library
		  - play - Play audio
		  - init - Init audio device
		  - deinit - De init audio device

		This library is availabe on OpenBSD.


	It is standard for libraries to not simply take literal values as their arguments,
	but to instead take the argument as a reference or pointer. This means they should
	be passed the name of a variable as a literal. This literal should contain the name
	of a valid variable which holds the data payload as a literal. Essentially, do not
	give it a literal value, but instead give it a variable which references another
	variable as a pointer.

	eg.

		New __Escape_std.io.print_ARG0 'Hello, World!'

	would not be proper. However,

		New msg 'Hello, World!'
		New __Escape_std.io.print_ARG0 'msg'

	would be.

	This choice was made in version Alpha 2 as an optimization to make code calling the
	same library function a lot not have to copy data around in such a way. This way
	was chosen to be a bit more readable for handwritten Pebble code (which was popular
	during the development of Alpha 2, as Rock did not exist.)



	std.io.print and std.io.printLn takes one argument to be the data to print.
	std.io.input takes zero arguments and blocks until input is given, returning
		it into the first return variable.
	std.misc.time takes zero arguments and gets the time and date and returns it into 
		the first return variable.
	std.misc.sleep takes one argument to be the time in ms to sleep for. 
	std.misc.random takes zero arguments and will generate a random unsigned 32bit number
		and return it into the first return variable.
	std.fs.dir.change takes one argument of the directory to enter. This should be a relative
		path and is generally operating system-dependent (eg. path handling).
	std.fs.dir.get takes zero arguments and returns the current working directory in the first
		return variable.
	std.fs.dir.list takes one argument to be the directory to list and returns the name of each
		subdirectory in the directory listed with a newline at the end of the name with one
		final newline after the payload in the first return variable.
	std.fs.file.read takes one argument to be the name of the file to read and returns the
		data (binary, ASCII if applicable) in the first return variable.
	std.fs.file.write and std.fs.file.writeBinary takes one argument to be the message to write 
		with the second to be the name of the file to write it to. std.fs.file.writeBinary 
		is safe for writting binary data.

